1727 document featsql udf support basic anonymous sql udf (#1801)
risingwavelabs/risingwave-docs: docs/sql/commands/sql-create-function.md

:::note

+ The currently supported syntax is for anonymous SQL UDFs. So `create function with_param_names(a INT, b INT) returns int language sql as 'select a + b';` is invalid at present in RisingWave.

+ Recursive definition is NOT supported at present. For example, the statement `create function recursive(INT, INT) returns int language sql as 'select recursive($1, $2) + recursive($1, $2)';` will fail.

:::

### Examples

Here are the examples of current supported syntax:

- `AS` clause with single quote definition

```sql title="Create function"
create function sub(INT, INT) returns int language sql as 'select $1 - $2';
```

```sql title="Call function"
select sub(1, 1);
----RESULT
0
```

- `AS` clause with dollar definition

```sql title="Create function"
create function add(INT, INT) returns int language sql as $$select $1 + $2$$;
```

```sql title="Call function"
select add(1, -1);
----RESULT
0
```

- SQL UDF with `RETURN` expression

```sql title="Create function"
create function add(INT, INT) returns int language sql return $1 + $2;
```

```sql title="Call function"
select add_return(1, 1);
----RESULT
2
```

> - SQL UDF with multiple types interleaving

Reviewer: @ShanlanLi I'm not sure "multiple types interleaving" is an accurate description here. I think it's just a function taking input of different data types. Search for a more accurate word or just plainly say UDF with input of different data types

Reviewer 2: Indeed, this description is simply for illustrating the purpose internally, we could probably change to "SQL UDF with input of different data types".

| **AS** *function_name_defined_in_server* | Specifies the function name defined in the UDF server.|
| **USING LINK** '*udf_server_address*' | Specifies the UDF server address. <br/>If you are running RisingWave in your local environment, the address is `http://localhost:<port>` <br/> If you are running RisingWave using Docker, the address is `http://host.docker.internal:<port>/`|

### Examples

Here is an example of using `CREATE FUNCTION` to declare a UDF defined by Python. For more details about how to define a UDF in Python, see [Use UDFs in Python](/sql/udf/udf-python.md).

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION gcd(int, int) RETURNS int
LANGUAGE python AS gcd USING LINK 'http://localhost:8815'; -- If you are running RisingWave using Docker, replace the address with 'http://host.docker.internal:8815'.
```

Here is an example of using `CREATE FUNCTION` to declare a UDF defined by Java. For more details about how to define a UDF in Java, see [Use UDFs in Java](/sql/udf/udf-java.md).

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION gcd(int, int) RETURNS int  
AS gcd  
USING LINK 'http://localhost:8815';
```

## SQL UDFs

> You can also define UDFs in RisingWave by SQL UDFs. The `CREATE FUNCTION` command is used to create and define these UDFs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also define SQL UDFs in RisingWave by using the `CREATE FUNCTION` command.
```

### Syntax

```sql
CREATE FUNCTION function_name ( argument_type [, ...] )
    [ RETURNS return_type ]

>     [ LANGUAGE sql]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    [ LANGUAGE sql ]
```

    [
      | AS as_definition

>       | RETURN return_definition

Reviewer 2: What about the following syntax, to emphasize users should pick exactly one of the definitions.

```sql
[
  [ AS as_definition ]
  or
  [ RETURN return_definition ]
]
```

    ]; 
```

For more details about the supported syntax, see the [examples of SQL UDFs](#examples-1) below.

### Parameters

| Parameter or clause | Description |
| --- | --- |

> | *function_name* | The name of the UDF that you want to declare in RisingWave. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| *function_name* | The name of the SQL UDF that you want to declare in RisingWave. |
```

| *argument_type* | The data type of the input parameter(s) that the UDF expects to receive.|
| **RETURNS** *return_type* | Specifies the data type of the return value from the UDF.|
| **LANGUAGE** *sql* | Its value must be `sql`.|
| **AS** *as_definition* | Defines the implementation of the function using SQL statements. `as_definition` can be single quote definition (e.g., `'select $1 + $2'`) or double dollar definition (e.g., `$$select $1 + $1$$`).|

> | **RETURN** *return_definition*| Alternative to the `AS` clause. `return_definition` can be an expression (e.g., `$1 + $2`).|

Reviewer 2: We'd better add a note here saying that `AS` and `RETURN` could not be specified simultaneously when creating sql udf definitions.

> :::note

Reviewer 2: Since currently supported syntax is for anonymous sql udfs, we could possibly add a note here too.
e.g., the following definition is invalid at present in RW
```sql
create function with_param_names(a INT, b INT) returns int language sql as 'select a + b';
```

> + Recursive definition is NOT supported. For example, the statement `create function recursive(INT, INT) returns int language sql as 'select recursive($1, $2) + recursive($1, $2)';` will fail.

Reviewer 2: Maybe in future PRs. 😄
```suggestion
+ Recursive definition is NOT supported at present. For example, the statement `create function recursive(INT, INT) returns int language sql as 'select recursive($1, $2) + recursive($1, $2)';` will fail.
```

> + The current implementation will only check for syntax correctness (i.e., the SQL body in the `AS` clause) by utilizing `Parser::parse_sql`, semantic check will be implemented in the future.

Reviewer 2: Semantic check has been supported and we could probably remove this note.
```suggestion
```

- `AS` clause with single quote definition

```sql title="Create function"
create function sub(INT, INT) returns int language sql as 'select $1 - $2';
```

```sql title="Call function"
select sub(1, 1);
----RESULT
0
```

- `AS` clause with dollar definition

```sql title="Create function"
create function add(INT, INT) returns int language sql as $$select $1 + $2$$;
```

```sql title="Call function"
select add(1, -1);
----RESULT
0
```

- SQL UDF with `RETURN` expression

```sql title="Create function"
create function add(INT, INT) returns int language sql return $1 + $2;
```

```sql title="Call function"
select add_return(1, 1);
----RESULT
2
```

- SQL UDF with multiple types interleaving

```sql title="Create function"
-- Multiple type interleaving
create function add_sub(INT, FLOAT, INT) returns float language sql as $$select -$1 + $2 - $3$$;

-- Multiple type interleaving with return expression
create function add_sub_return(INT, FLOAT, INT) returns float language sql return -$1 + $2 - $3;

-- Complex types interleaving
create function add_sub_types(INT, BIGINT, FLOAT, DECIMAL, REAL) returns real language sql as 'select $1 + $2 - $3 + $4 + $5';
```

```sql title="Call function"

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove the empty newline here.

select add_sub(1, 5.1415926, 1);
----RESULT
3.1415926

select add_sub_return(1, 5.1415926, 1);
----RESULT
3.1415926

select add_sub_types(1, 1919810114514, 3.1415926, 1.123123, 101010.191919);
----RESULT
1919810215523.1734494
```

- SQL UDF calling other pre-defined SQL UDFs

```sql  title="Create function"

> 

Reviewer 2: ditto.
